# Chapter 6: Acknowledgements

I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all those who have been a part
of this project. The journey of this research, which started even before this
thesis, initially emerged as a "Proof of Concept." Over time, it transformed
into a remarkably intricate and surprisingly fulfilling endeavor.

> "In every small detail lies the possibility to exceed beyond what we imagine."

I am immensely grateful to *The Qt Company*. Their trust and the flexibility
they offered were crucial for this project. The countless hours I devoted to
tackling these challenges and exploring various topics during my work time were
made possible because of their constant support. This project would not have
been possible in its current form without their backing.

My sincere thanks also go to the *Cologne University of Applied Sciences*,
particularly *Prof. Dr. Arnulph Fuhrmann*. His guidance allowed me to navigate my
research path freely, adapting to the evolving directions of the study. His
insightful feedback in our discussions greatly contributed to the progress of
this research.

A special thanks goes to *Dr. Cristián Maureira-Fredes*. He played an
instrumental role in introducing me to the Qt Company and mentored me
throughout my internship, consistently cherishing a supportive environment. His
patience on my various "ideas" (read: crazy thoughts) was invaluable. He helped
mold these ideas, which otherwise might have remained mere thoughts. I recall
one of our initial discussions at the Qt office in Berlin, revolving around
this very topic of research:

> How come, that Qt user interfaces are not available for audio plugins? It
> would be such a good fit.

His response was encouraging: "Perhaps it's up to **you** to make it happen.
It's all there for the taking." And here we are. I am truly grateful for his
trust and the constant assistance he provided, whether through reviewing my
documents or enlightening me with his knowledge. His mentorship has been
extraordinary, and I am immensely thankful for it.

I also want to express special gratitude to *Alexandre Bique*. Our paths
crossed at SUPERBOOTH23, where our conversation quickly evolved into in-depth
discussions about plugins, GUIs, and how we imagined the future of them.
Alexandre's work at Bitwig, particularly as the inventor and lead developer of
the **CL**ever **A**udio **P**lugin standard, has been pivotal. He consistently
provided a flow of new ideas, was receptive to mine, and provided significant
guidance that helped shape this project. I am truly thankful for his support
and collaboration in this journey.

I also wish to acknowledge several colleagues for their remarkable support.
*Tor Arne Vestbø's* input during our initial exploration of this topic at a Qt
hackathon laid the groundwork for this research. *Ivan Solovev's* assistance in
navigating complex C++ concepts and his invaluable feedback on my ideas were
pivotal in refining this project. *Marc Mutz's* extensive knowledge and
insightful discussions greatly accelerated my learning and understanding of
various technologies. Additionally, *Fabian Kosmale's* expertise in the
intricate workings of Qt's event system, his answers to my numerous queries,
and his recommendation of QtGrpc as the backbone for this research were
immensely helpful.

Finally, I extend my heartfelt gratitude to the QtGrpc team, especially to
*Tatiana Borisova* and *Alexey Edelev*. They are the inventors of QtGrpc and Qt
Protobuf, and key figures in their ongoing development and maintenance.
Throughout the research process, their guidance was pivotal in steering the
project towards success. Their profound knowledge in these fields continuously
inspired and supported me.

I consider myself extremely lucky to have worked alongside such an amazing and
talented group of people. This project has thrived on the valuable feedback and
guidance provided by the world's leading experts in this area of research,
profoundly shaping and enriching its evolution.
